Ancient China was a large country with two different regions. The North has the Yellow River basin, far from the sea, cold climate, dry land, sparse vegetation, and rare products. The South has the Yangtze River basin, a warm climate, green trees, and rich produce.
Ancient China has a long history dating back to the end of the 3rd millennium BC. AD lasted until the 3rd century BC. AD with the event of Qin Shi Huang uniting China with violent authority, starting the centralized feudal period. During those 2,000 years of history, Chinese history is divided into two major periods: The period from the 9th century BC. AD before and the period from the 8th century to the end of the 3rd century BC. CN.
The first period had the Xia, Shang and Western Zhou dynasties. According to ancient texts, the Ha Dynasty was born around the 21st century BC. CE, is the milestone marking the beginning of slavery in China. Around the first half of the 17th century p. AD, the head of the Thuong tribe, Thanh Thang, overthrew King Kiet of the Ha Dynasty, establishing the Shang Dynasty with its capital in Bac land, Ha Nam province now. By the 14th century BC. AD, Ban Canh moved the capital to An land in today's An Duong district, Ha Nam. Therefore, the Thuong Dynasty was also called the An Dynasty. Around the 11th century BC. AD, King Wu of Chu, son of King Wen of Zhou, killed King Tru of the Shang Dynasty and established the Zhou Dynasty (the first stage of the Zhou Dynasty was the Western Zhou Dynasty), bringing slavery in China to its peak. During this first period, philosophical ideas appeared, although they did not reach the level of a system. The worldview of mythology, religion and mystical idealism was the dominant worldview in the spiritual life of Chinese society at that time. Philosophical thought of this period closely linked theocracy and secular power and from the beginning it explained the close connection between political and social life with the field of morality and ethics. At the same time, during this period, concepts of rustic materialism and progressive atheistic ideas appeared in opposition to the idealism and mysticism that dominated contemporary times.
The second period is the Eastern Zhou period (often called the Spring and Autumn period - Warring States period) which is the period of transition from slavery to feudalism. During the Western Zhou Dynasty, land belonged to the King, but under the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, the supreme ownership of land belonged to the landlord class and the private ownership of land was formed. From there, the distinction between rich and poor based on property appeared. Society at this time is in a very chaotic state. The competition for social status by powerful forces pushed ancient Chinese society into a state of constant fierce war. This is the historical condition that required the dissolution of the Zhou dynasty's clan slavery system and the formation of feudal society; demanding the dissolution of the patriarchal state and building a feudal state to liberate productive forces and pave the way for social development. That vibrant change of the times has created and given rise to venues and centers of "artists" who always debate the old social order and propose models of a future society. . History calls this period the period of "Hundred families of monks" (hundred families, hundred teachers), "Hundred families of scholars" (hundred families competing for fame). It was in that process that great thinkers were born and quite complete schools of philosophy were formed. The characteristics of these schools are that they always take people and society as the center of research, and have a general tendency to solve practical political and ethical problems of society. According to Liu Ham (Western Han Dynasty), China during this period had nine main philosophical schools (called the Nine Schools or the Nine Schools) which were: Confucianism, Mohism, Taoism, Yin-Yang, Fame, and Legalism. , Farmer family, Tung Hoang family, Miscellaneous family. It can be said that, except for Buddhism, which was later imported from India, the philosophical schools formed in the Spring and Autumn - Warring States period were supplemented and perfected through many periods of medieval history, and have existed throughout the period. The development of the history of Chinese thought until modern times.
Born on the socio-economic basis of Eastern Zhou, compared with Western philosophy
and India at the same time, ancient and medieval Chinese philosophy had outstanding characteristics.
First, emphasize the humanistic spirit. In ancient and medieval Chinese philosophical thought, types of thoughts related to humans such as human philosophy, moral philosophy, political philosophy, and historical philosophy developed, while natural philosophy had blurred part.
Second, focus on ethical politics. Throughout thousands of years of history, Chinese philosophers have pursued the kingdom of morality and ethics. They considered the practice of morality as the most basic practical activity of a human life, placing it in the first place of life. social activities. It can be said that this is the philosophical reason leading to the underdevelopment of China's epistemology and the backwardness of empirical science.
Third, emphasize the harmony and unity between nature and society. When studying the movements of nature, society and human life, most philosophers of the Pre-Qin period emphasized the harmony and unity between opposites, valuing the uniformity of interrelated relationships. support of concepts, considering the reconciliation of conflicts as the ultimate goal of solving problems. Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism... all oppose "excesses" and "inadequacies". The synthesis and connection of the categories "unity of heaven and man", "unity of practice", "unity of physical use", "fusion of mind and matter"... have demonstrated the harmonious and unified characteristics of Middle and ancient Chinese philosophy.
Fourth is intuitive thinking. The outstanding feature of the thinking mode of ancient and medieval Chinese philosophy is intuitive perception, that is, found in feeling or experience. Feeling means placing yourself between the object, conducting rational communication, you and the object match, arousing hunches, managing many dimensions in an instant, from there grasping the abstract essence. Most Chinese philosophical thinkers are familiar with the long-term experiential, intuitive way of thinking and suddenly become enlightened. The intuitive thinking method especially attaches importance to the effect of the mind, considering the mind as the root of cognition, "using the mind to cover things". The so-called "reaching the ultimate truth" of Taoism, Buddhism, Physics, etc. Heavy on suggestion, only relying on intuition to feel, so lacks clear proof.
Therefore, concepts and categories are only intuition, lacking logical reasoning, making ancient Chinese philosophy lack the necessary methods to build a scientific theoretical system.
Comments on ancient and medieval Chinese philosophy:
Ancient Chinese philosophy was born during the transition period from slavery to feudal society. In that historical context, the primary concern of ancient Chinese thinkers was issues of practical political and ethical life of society. Although they still stand on an idealistic viewpoint to explain and propose solutions to social problems, their ideas have had a great effect in establishing a social order according to the model of society. centralized feudal monarchy according to Eastern feudal political and ethical values.
Besides profound reflections on social issues, ancient Chinese philosophy also contributed to the history of world philosophy profound ideas about the changes of the universe. Although the ideas of Yin and Yang and the Five Elements still have certain limitations, they are unique philosophies of materialistic and dialectical nature of the ancient Chinese, which have had a great influence on the world. later philosophical views not only of the Chinese but also of countries influenced by Chinese philosophy.